---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.15.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---


# Reparing values
So far, we've dealt with structural issues in data. but there's a lot more to
cleaning.  

Today,  we'll deal with how to fix the values within  the data.
## Cleaning Data review

Instead of more practice with these manipulations, below are more
examples of cleaning data to see how these types of manipulations get used.  
Your goal here is not to memorize every possible thing, but to build a general
idea of what good data looks like and good habits for cleaning data and keeping
it reproducible.  
- [Cleaning the Adult Dataset](https://ryanwingate.com/projects/machine-learning-data-prep/adult/adult-cleaning/)
- [All Shades](https://github.com/the-pudding/data/tree/master/foundation-names#allshadescsv--allshadesr)
Also here are some tips on general data management and organization.

This article is a comprehensive [discussion of data cleaning](https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ultimate-guide-to-data-cleaning-3969843991d4).

### A Cleaning Data Recipe

__not everything possible, but good enough for this course__


1. Can you use parameters to read the data in better?
1. Fix the index and column headers (making these easier to use makes the rest easier)
1. Is the data strucutred well?
1. Are there missing values?
1. Do the datatypes match what you expect by looking at the head or a sample?
1. Are categorical variables represented in usable way?
1. Does your analysis require filtering or augmenting the data?



```{code-cell} ipython3
import pandas as pd
import seaborn as sns
import numpy as np

sns.set_theme(palette= "colorblind")
# toy data set
na_toy_df = pd.DataFrame(data = [[1,3,4,5],[2 ,6, pd.NA,3]])

# coffee data
arabica_data_url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jldbc/coffee-quality-database/master/data/arabica_data_cleaned.csv'

coffee_df = pd.read_csv(arabica_data_url,index_col=0)

# github api data
rhodyprog4ds_gh_events_url = 'https://api.github.com/orgs/rhodyprog4ds/events'
course_gh_df = pd.read_json(rhodyprog4ds_gh_events_url)

# make plots look nicer and increase font size
sns.set_theme(font_scale=2,palette='colorblind')
```

## What is clean enough?

This is a great question, without an easy answer.

It depends on what you want to do.  This is why it's important to have potential
questions in mind if you are cleaning data for others *and* why we often have to
do a little bit more preparation after a dataset has been "cleaned"



Dealing with missing data is a whole research area. There isn't one solution.


[in 2020 there was a whole workshop on missing](https://artemiss-workshop.github.io/)

one organizer is the main developer of [sci-kit learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/) the ML package we will use soon.  In a [2020 invited talk](https://static.sched.com/hosted_files/ray2020/08/Keynote-%20Easier%20Machine%20Learning%20Thoughts%20From%20Scikit-Learn%20-%20Ga%C3%ABl%20Varoquaux%2C%20Research%20Director%2C%20Inria.pdf) he listed more automatic handling as an active area of research  and a development goal for sklearn.

There are also many classic approaches both when training and when [applying models](https://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume8/saar-tsechansky07a/saar-tsechansky07a.pdf).

[example application in breast cancer detection](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.701.4234&rep=rep1&type=pdf)

Even in pandas, dealing with [missing values](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/user_guide/missing_data.html) is under [experimentation](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/user_guide/missing_data.html#missing-data-na)
 as to how to represent it symbolically


Missing values even causes the [datatypes to change](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/user_guide/missing_data.html#missing-data-casting-rules-and-indexing)


That said, there are are om
Pandas gives a few basic tools:

- dropna
- fillna




Filling can be good if you know how to fill reasonably, but don't have data to
spare by dropping.  For example
- you can approximate with another column
- you can approximate with that column from other rows

Special case, what if we're filling a summary table?
- filling with a symbol for printing can be a good choice, but not for analysis.

**whatever you do, document it**

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df_fixedcols.info()
```

### Filling missing values 
The 'Lot.Number' has a lot of NaN values, how can we explore it?

We can look at the type:
```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df_fixedcols['lot_number'].dtype
```

And we can look at the value counts.

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df_fixedcols['lot_number'].value_counts()
```


We see that a lot are '1', maybe we know that when the data was collected, if the Farm only has one lot, some people recorded '1' and others left it as missing. So we could fill in with 1:

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df_fixedcols['lot_number'].fillna('1')
```

Note that even after we called `fillna` we display it again and the original data is unchanged.
To save the filled in column we have a few choices:
- use the `inplace` parameter. This doesn't offer performance advantages, but does It still copies the object, but then reassigns the pointer. Its under discussion to [deprecate](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/16529)
- write to a new DataFrame
- add a column




```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['lot_number_clean'] = coffee_df['Lot.Number'].fillna('1')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.head(1)
```

## Dropping


Dropping is a good choice when you otherwise have a lot of data and the data is
missing at random.

Dropping can be risky if it's not missing at random. For example, if we saw in
the coffee data that one of the scores was missing for all of the rows from one
country, or even just missing more often in one country, that could bias our
results.  

We can look at dropping in this toy data set.
```{code-cell} ipython3
na_toy_df
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
na_toy_df.dtypes
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
na_toy_df.dropna()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
na_toy_df.dropna(axis=1)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
na_toy_df.mean()
```

why is this object?
### Dropping missing values
To illustrate how `dropna` works, we'll use the `shape` method:
```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.shape
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.dropna().shape
```

We could instead tell it to only drop rows with `NaN` in a subset of the columns.

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.dropna(subset=['altitude_low_meters']).shape
```

By default, it drops any row with one or more `NaN` values.

In the [Open Policing Project Data Summary](https://openpolicing.stanford.edu/data/) we saw that they made a summary information that showed which variables had at least 70% not missing values.  We can similarly choose to keep only variables that have more than a specific threshold of data, using the `thresh` parameter and `axis=1` to drop along columns.

```{code-cell} ipython3
n_rows, n_cols = coffee_df.shape
coffee_df.dropna(thresh=.7*n_rows, axis=1).shape
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
n_rows, _ = coffee_df.shape
```

## Inconsistent values



This was one of the things that many of you anticipated or had observed.  A useful way to investigate for this, is to use `value_counts` and sort them alphabetically by the values from the original data, so that similar ones will be consecutive in the list. Once we have the `value_counts()` Series, the values from the `coffee_df` become the index, so we use `sort_index`.

Let's look at the `in_country_partner` column

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['In.Country.Partner'].value_counts()
```



We can see there's only one `Blossom Valley International\n` but 58 `Blossom Valley International`, the former is likely a typo, especially since `\n` is a special character for a newline. Similarly, with 'Specialty Coffee Ass' and 'Specialty Coffee Association'.
```{code-cell} ipython3
partner_corrections = {'Blossom Valley International\n':'Blossom Valley International',
  'Specialty Coffee Ass':'Specialty Coffee Association'}
coffee_df['in_country_partner_clean'] = coffee_df['In.Country.Partner'].replace(
  to_replace=partner_corrections)
coffee_df['in_country_partner_clean'].value_counts().sort_index()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.columns
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df_clean = coffee_df.rename(lambda s: s.lower().replace('.','_'),axis=1)
coffee_df_clean.head(1)
```

## JSons

Some datasets have a nested structure

We want to transform each one of those from a dictionary like thing into a
row in a data frame.

```{code-cell} ipython3
course_gh_df.head(2)
```


### Casting Review

If we have a variable that is not the type we want like this:

```{code-cell} ipython3
a ='5'
```

we can check type
```{code-cell} ipython3
type(a)
```

and we can use the name of the type we want, as a function to *cast* it to the new type. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
type(int(a))
```

### Handling dicts within a Data Frame
We can see each row is a Series type. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
type(course_gh_df.loc[0])
```

The individual values in the actor column is then a dictionary

```{code-cell} ipython3
type(course_gh_df.loc[0]['actor'])
```

We can use the series constructor to transform it. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
pd.Series(course_gh_df.loc[0]['actor'])
```

We can use [pandas `apply`](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.apply.html) to do the same thing to every item in a dataset (over rows or columns as items )

```{code-cell} ipython3
course_gh_df['actor'].apply(pd.Series).head(1)
```

compared to the original: 
```{code-cell} ipython3
course_gh_df.head(1)
```

### Unpacking at scale

here we see how the list comprehensions we looked at in isolation before start to come in handy.  

We want to handle several columns this way, so we'll make alist of the names. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
js_col = ['actor','repo','payload','org']
```


`pd.concat` takes a list of dataframes and puts the together in one DataFrame. [see its docs for more detail](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.concat.html)

So, we use a list comprehension to iterate over all of the columsn that we want to transform, transform them, store the fixed `DataFrame`s in a list and concat them together into a single new `DataFrame`

```{code-cell} ipython3
pd.concat([course_gh_df[col].apply(pd.Series) for col in js_col],axis=1).head(1)
```


This is close, but a lot of columns have the same name. To fix this we will
 rename the new columns so that they have the original column
name prepended to the new name.

pandas has a rename method for this.

and this is another job for lambdas. 


```{code-cell} ipython3
pd.concat([course_gh_df[col].apply(pd.Series,).rename(
    columns= lambda i_col: col + '_' + i_col )
           for col  in js_col],axis=1).head()
```

The `rename` method can take a `lambda` function to rename columns in a pattern. we want to combine the original column name with the new column name.  ` col + '_' + i_col ` does this where `i_col` is the column name after the `.apply(pd.Series)` and the `col` is the column name of the original column before unpacking.  



To finish off, we can first get the columns that are not in the unpacked, put them in a list, then add the two lists together before concatenating them all together. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
cols_not_unpacked_list = [course_gh_df[[col for col in
                    course_gh_df.columns if not(col in js_col)] ]]
unpacked_cols_list = [course_gh_df[col].apply(pd.Series,).rename(
                    columns= lambda i_col: col + '_' + i_col )
                    for col  in js_col]
pd.concat(cols_not_unpacked_list +unpacked_cols_list,axis=1)
```






## Questions after class

### After you do analysis with a specific column and cleaned it for that, should you restore the original dataframe and reclean it to do a different analysis?

You might, if the analyses are compeltely different and unrelated. More often, however, we would clean the whole dataset, save the cleaning script/notebook (can have more context), and save the cleaned dataset to a csv. Building more breadth of understanding of these practices, is what you will do with the last part of A4.  Your task there is to look at a few examples of cleaning that I have gathered for you and answer questions that start to build your intuition with this.  

Ultimately though, cleaning data is something that you do not know everything there is to know about it in one shot, over time you see more and more examples.  

### I don't fully understand the lambda function

If you want a technical specific understanding of it, I recommend the Python language documentation on [lambda functions](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#lambda) and the [wikipedia article on anonymous functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anonymous_function) for more breadth and other related concepts across languages. 

At a practial level it is a shortand syntax for defining a small function. For example the following two functions do the same thing. 
```{code-cell} ipython3
repeat_lambda = lambda content, reps: content*reps

def repeat_func(content, reps):
    return content*reps
```

First, we can examine them
```{code-cell} ipython3
type(repeat_lambda), type( repeat_func)
```

they are both callable, but slightly different types. 

Now we can call our functions: 

```{code-cell} ipython3
repeat_lambda('a',3) == repeat_func('a',3)
```

and this is not a specific case, but always works. We can do a small random experiment to see

We'll use the string library to get a string of the alphabet
```{code-cell} ipython3
import string
string.ascii_uppercase
```

We can pick even a random length, then random characters and a random number of repetitions

```{code-cell} ipython3
rand_length = np.random.randint(10)
random_content = np.random.choice(list(string.ascii_uppercase),size=rand_length)
rand_reps = np.random.randint(10)

random_content, rand_reps
```

We can still apply this and see that it is the same. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
repeat_lambda(random_content, rand_reps) == repeat_func(random_content, rand_reps)
```

### Json use cases vs csv use cases

Once we read the data in, there is no difference.  Where they are *generated* there are tradeoffs. JSON is a popular way to log activity


### Why are so many datasets so messy in the first place?


### Are there more resources to see when its appropriate to fill in missing data with certain values?

I have not found a lot of good resources on this, unfortunately. Data Science is a complex discipline and **very new** especially at the undergraduate level. The first data science degrees were only at the graduate level. 

The complexity lies in integrating information from computer science, statistics, and *domain knowledge*. Domain knowledge is going to be different in every dataset.  

It is okay to now know for sure the best thing to do.  The most important thing is  document what you did and why so that you can justify the choices and consider their impact later in your analysis. 

### Can we get a more in-depth explanation of what is going on in the last piece of code you provided?

above

### What is the normal percent of NAs that need to be filled for most people to get rid of that line?

Again, unfortunately there are not fixed rules. 

Missing 10% of only 50 samples might be detrimental, where missing 30% of 10000 could be okay. 

It depends what you are going to do with the data after cleaning, what the threshold is. 