---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.15.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Exploratory Data Analysis

Now we get to start actual data science!


## First, a note on assignments


### the goal 
- I am not looking for "an answer"
- You should not be either
- I am looking for evidence that  you **understand** the material (thus far including prereqs)
- You should be trying to **understand** material 

This means that in office hours, I am going to:
- ask you questions to help you think about the problem and the material 
- help direct your attention to the right part of the error message to figure out what is wrong


### Getting help

Sending me a screenshot is almost guaranteed to *not* get you a help.  Not because I do not want to, but because I literally do not have the information to get you an answer. 

Typically when someone do not know how to fix something from the error message, it is because they are reading the wrong part of the error message or looking at the wrong part of the code trying to find the problem. 

This means they end up screenshotting that wrong thing, so I literally **cannot** tell what is wrong from the screenshot. 

I am not being stubborn, I just literally cannot tell what is wrong because I do not have enough information.  Debugging code requires context, if you deprive me that, then I cannot help. 

To get asynchronous help: 
- upload your whole notebook, errors and all
- create an issue on that repo


## This week: Exploratory Data Analysis


- How to summarize data
- Interpretting summaries
- Visualizing data
- interpretting summaries



### Summarizing and Visualizing Data are **very** important

- People cannot interpret high dimensional or large samples quickly
- Important in EDA to help you make decisions about the rest of your analysis
- Important in how you report your results
- Summaries are similar calculations to performance metrics we will see later
- visualizations are often essential in debugging models


**THEREFORE**
- You have  [a lot of chances](https://rhodyprog4ds.github.io/BrownFall22/syllabus/achievements.html#assignments-and-skills) to earn summarize and visualize
- we will be picky when we assess if you earned them or not

```{code-cell} ipython3
import pandas as pd
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_data_url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jldbc/coffee-quality-database/master/data/robusta_data_cleaned.csv'
coffee_df = pd.read_csv(coffee_data_url, index_col=0)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.head(1)
```

## Describing a Dataset

So far, we've loaded data in a few different ways and then we've examined
DataFrames as a data structure, looking at what different attributes they have
and what some of the methods are, and how to get data into them.

We can also get more structural information with the [`info`](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.info.html) 

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.info()
```

Now, we can actually start to analyze the data itself.

The [`describe`](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.describe.html) method provides us with a set of summary statistics that broadly

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.describe()
```


````{margin}
```{admonition} further reading
On the [documentation page for describe](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.describe.html) the "<i class="fas fa-info-circle"></i>
 See Also" shows the links to the documentation of most of the individual functions.  This is a good way to learn about other things, or find something when you are not quite sure what it would be named.  Go to a function thats similar to what you want and then look at the related functions.
```
````

From this, we can draw several conclusions.  FOr example straightforward ones like:
- the smallest number of bags rated is 1 and at least 25% of the coffees rates only had 1 bag
- the first ratings included were 2012 and last in 2017  (min & max)
- the mean Mouthfeel was 7.5
- Category One defects are not very common ( the 75th% is 0)

Or more nuanced ones that compare across variables like
- the raters scored coffee higher on Uniformity.Cup and Clean.Cup than other scores (mean score; only on the ones that seem to have a scale of up to 8/10)
- the coffee varied more in Mouthfeel and Balance that most other scores (the std; only on the ones that seem to have a scale of of up to 8/10)
- there are 3 ratings with no altitude (count of other variables is 28; alt is 25)

And these all give us a sense of the values and the distribution or spread fo the data in each column.



### Understanding Quantiles

The 50% has another more common name: the median.  It means 50% of the data are lower (and higher) than this value.  

%25 i sthe number that 25% of the data is less than
%75 is the number that 75% of the data is less than


### Individual variable

We can use the descriptive statistics on individual columns as well.


```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Balance'].descirbe()
```

This is an `AttributeError` because there is no method or property of a `pd.Series` that is named `'descirbe'` that tells me it is a typo. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Balance'].describe()
```


## Individual statistics
We can also extract each of the statistics that the `describe` method calculates individually, by name.  

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.mean(numeric_only=True)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.min(numeric_only=True)
```

The quantiles
are tricky, we cannot just `.25%()` to get the 25% percentile, we have to use the
`quantile` method and pass it a value between 0 and 1.

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Flavor'].quantile(.8)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Aftertaste'].mean()
```


## Working with categorical data


There are different columns in the describe than the the whole dataset:
```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.columns
```

So far, the stats above are only for numerical features. 


We can get the prevalence of each one with `value_counts`
```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Color'].value_counts()
```


```{admonition} Try it Yourself
Note `value_counts` does not count the `NaN` values, but `count` counts all of the
not missing values and the shape of the DataFrame is the total number of rows.
How can you get the number of missing Colors?
```

Describe only operates on the numerical columns, but we might want to know about the others.  We can get the number of each value with `value_counts`

What is the most common country of origin?

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Country.of.Origin'].value_counts()
```

Value counts returns a pandas Series that has two parts: values and index
```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Country.of.Origin'].value_counts().values
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Country.of.Origin'].value_counts().index
```


The `max` method takes the max of the values. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Country.of.Origin'].value_counts().max()
```


We can get the name of the most common country out of this Series using `idmax`

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Country.of.Origin'].value_counts().idxmax()
```

## Which country scores highest on flavor?

Let's try to answer this with plots first

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Flavor'].plot(kind='bar')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Flavor'].plot(kind='hist')
```


Seaborn give us [*opinionated defaults*](https://seaborn.pydata.org/tutorial/introduction.html#opinionated-defaults-and-flexible-customization)


```{code-cell} ipython3
import seaborn as sns
```

seaborn's alias is `sns` as an inside joke among the developers to the character, [Samual Norman Seaborn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sam_Seaborn) from West Wing they named the library after [per their FAQ](https://seaborn.pydata.org/faq.html#why-is-seaborn-imported-as-sns)


So we can choose a typoe of plot and give it the whole dataframe and pass the variables to different parameters for them to be used in different ways. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
sns.catplot(data =coffee_df, x='Flavor',kind ='count',col='Country.of.Origin',
           col_wrap=3)
```

### Are any coffees more than one standard deviation above the average in `Flavor` ?

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df['Flavor'].mean() + coffee_df['Flavor'].std(), coffee_df['Flavor'].max()
```

Yes, one is more than one standard deviation from the mean. 

```{code-cell} ipython3

```

## Questions after class

### can pycharm access urls?

Probably, it should not block them and they are language features, but I do not use it to know. 

### can we do what we did today in pycharm?

In theory, but pycharm probably will not handle the plots gracefully. 

For this class, you need to submit notebook files, so pycharm will not work.  

Pycharm is not typically used in datascience. 

### Are the bars on the Seaborn plot random colors, or do the colors have some meaning?

here, each different value is a different color. We wil control it more on Thursday



### what types of jobs use what we learned today

Any data science role would use these skills daily. 


### Is there an equivalent for the index of the minimum value, such as idxmin()?

### What is the std

standard deviation [pandas docs on calculation](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.std.html).  The [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation) article on standard deviation is a good source on this. 


### Why can we not use matplotlib?

You *can* and you may for some customizaiton, but seaborn usually makes things faster to code and easier to read. I will not teach much matplotlib, but if you know it, up to date, not outdated, you may use it in some cases. 

### One question I have is what exactly the series object can be used for

A series is one column or one row of a dataframe. 

### how these lines of code can be used more efficiently in larger data sets?

For extremely large datasets if it's too much to plot, you might, for exaple, sample the dataset to only plot a subset. 

Otherwise this will still work. 

### Can you change what the plot graphs rather than an index vs frequency?

yes, we can change the plot to whatever we want. 

### actually I would like to know like with our country/flavor example can they be put in the same plot but with different colors for the different countries to each country side by side for a given score

yes

### Can assignment 3 can be release so we can pre-read it over.

Yes, it is posted now

## Questions we'll answer in class on thurday

```{important}
These are **great** questions, I'm just not going to answer them here and then again in class on Thursday
```

- What other types of graphs could be used?
- Is there a way to use both x and y in sns without creating multiple charts?
- Using matplotlib, we never got to use it to class, and I want to know the difference between that and seanborn
- How to change the colors of the plots.
- What do we usually tend to look for in terms of patterns when trying to formulate questions about the data, or several pieces of data?

