---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.15.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Representing Text

```{code-cell} ipython3
from sklearn.feature_extraction import text
from sklearn.metrics.pairwise import euclidean_distances
from sklearn import datasets
import pandas as pd
from sklearn.naive_bayes import MultinomialNB
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

ng_X,ng_y = datasets.fetch_20newsgroups(categories =['comp.graphics','sci.crypt'],
                                       return_X_y = True)
```




## Text as Data

Let's make a variable with a sentence in it: 


```{code-cell} ipython3
s1 = 'I like cheese'
```


How can we analyze these? All of the machine leanring models we have seen only use numerical features organized into a table with one row per samplea and one column per feature.

That's actually generally true.  ALl ML models require numerical features, at some point. The process of taking data that is not numerical and tabular, which is called unstrucutred, into strucutred (tabular) format we require is called feature extraction.  There are many, many ways to do that.  We'll see a few over the course of the rest of the semester.  Some more advanced models hide the feature extraction, by putting it in the same function, but it's always there.


## Terms


- document: unit of text we’re analyzing (one sample)
- token: sequence of characters in some particular document that are grouped together as a useful semantic unit for processing (basically a word)
- stop words: no meaning, we don’t need them (like a, the, an,). Note that this is context dependent
- dictionary: all of the possible words that a given system knows how to process



## Bag of Words Representation

We're going to learn a represetnation called the bag of words.  It ignores the order of the words within a document. To do this, we'll first extract all of the tokens (tokenize) the docuemtns and then count how mnay times each word appears.  This will be our numerical representation of the data.  

````{margin}
```{admonition} Further Reading
[Transformers](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/data_transforms.html) are another broad class of sklearn objects.  We've seen Estimators mostly so far.
We're focusing on the [text feature extraction](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/feature_extraction.html#text-feature-extraction) for now.
```
````
Then we initialize our transformer, and use the fit transform method to fit the vectorizer model and apply it to this sentence.



```{code-cell} ipython3
counts = text.CountVectorizer()
```


```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.fit_transform([s1])
```
We see it returns a sparse matrix.  A sparse matrix means that it has a lot of 0s or missing values in it and so we only represent the data.  If we were to represent all of the 0s or NAs we would have to use the same amount of mmory for a full matrix and a sparse on

### Sparse Matrices

Considr a matrix that's 10x10, that meand 100 total values to store if we store it dense.  If we have only a small number of values that are not 0, say 5%, storing all of that seems like a lot.  As a spars matrix, we can instead store the each value and its location.  So 5% is 5 values, but we store 3 values for it (value, column, row) for 15.  15 is still a lot less than 100.  So as long as less than 1/3 of th values are used sparse format is an advantage.  


```{code-cell} ipython3
mfull = np.asarray([[1,0,0,0,0],[0,0,1,0,0],[0,0,0,1,0]])
```

but as a sparse matrix, we could store fewer values.
```{code-cell} ipython3
[[0,0,1],[1,2,1],[2,3,1]]# the above
```
Text data will often be sparse. 


So any matrix where the number of total values is low enough, we can store it more efficiently by tracking the locations and values instead of all of the zeros.

To actually see it though we have to cast out of that into a regular array.

### Viewing it fully

```{code-cell} ipython3

counts.fit_transform([s1]).toarray()
```

Since it's only one sentence, it's all 1s because each word occurs onece. 



````{margin}
```{tip}
Notice that we keep using the same tools over and over to explore how things work.  You can do this on your own, when you're learning new things. Example
code is readily available online but not all of it is well documented or
clearly explained.

Also, in a job, much, much, more of your time will be spent reading code than writing code from scratch. These strategies will help you get familiar with a new code base and get up to speed faster.
```
````



We see that what it does is creates an ordered (the values are the order) list of words as the parameters of this model

```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.get_feature_names_out()
```

If we add more words, the vocabulary size increases. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
s1 = 'I like cheese very much; '
counts.fit_transform([s1]).toarray()
```

Again, all ones, but more

with the new vocabulary: 
```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.get_feature_names_out()
```


```{code-cell} ipython3

counts.fit_transform([s1]).toarray()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.get_feature_names_out()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
s1 = 'I like cheese very much; I cannot wait to eat mac n cheese on Thursday'
counts.fit_transform([s1]).toarray()
```


```{code-cell} ipython3

counts.fit_transform([s1]).toarray()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.get_feature_names_out()
```

Since cheese was in the document twice, there is a 2 now. 


To make it more interesting, we need two documents, so we'll add another sentence

```{code-cell} ipython3
s2 = 'I go to URI and my favorite class is CSC310'
```

WHen we transform both together

```{code-cell} ipython3

counts.fit_transform([s1,s2]).toarray()
```

we have counts of each word and some words that are in both documents. 


```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.get_feature_names_out()
```


We can put all of that together into a dataframe to make it easier to interpret and analyze further. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
vocabulary = counts.get_feature_names_out()
count_mat = counts.fit_transform([s1,s2]).toarray()
count_df = pd.DataFrame(data = count_mat, columns =vocabulary)
count_df
```

From this we can see that the representation is the count of how many times each word appears.


## Basic text analysis 


We can use this to get the total number of times each word appears across all of the documents:

```{code-cell} ipython3
count_df.sum()
```


or the total number of words in each document: 
```{code-cell} ipython3
count_df.sum(axis=1)
```




## Representing text manually

`vocabulary = ['and', 'are', 'cat', 'cats', 'dogs', 'pets', 'popular', 'videos']`

cats and dogs are pets

`vector = [1,1,0,1,1,1,0,0]`

cat videos are popular

`vector = [0,1,1,0,0,0,1,1]`


## Distances in text
We can now use a distance function to calculate how far apart the different sentences are.

```{code-cell} ipython3
dists = euclidean_distances(count_df)
dists
```


This distance is only int terms of actual reused words.  It does not contain anything about the meaning of the words

## Classifying Text Data

We can classify text data.  

We imported a dataset from sklearn.

Lables are the topic of the article 0 = computer graphics, 1 = cyrptography.

First, we transform the features first, we need to transform before we split to test and train, because if we transform them separately, they could have different vocabularies. 


```{code-cell} ipython3
count_vec = text.CountVectorizer()
ng_vec = counts.fit_transform(ng_X)
```

We can then instantiate the classifier.  This is naive bayes like the gaussian naive bayes we saw before. 


It assumes each feature is a count and independent. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
clf = MultinomialNB()
```

Now we split to train and test.  


```{code-cell} ipython3
ng_vec_train, ng_vec_test, ng_y_train, ng_y_test = train_test_split(ng_vec,ng_y)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
clf.fit(ng_vec_train,ng_y_train).score(ng_vec_test,ng_y_test)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
ng_vec_train
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
euclidean_distances(ng_vec_train).mean()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3

```

## Questions after class 

### How similar is this method to the methods that companies such as Twitter use for sentiment analysis?

Sentiment analysis is done by labeling documents as positive or negative and training a model to predict that.  

You could do sentiment analysis with a bag of words representation. 
